Data Preparation external development docs [PAB-5299] (#4807)
SoftwareAG/c8y-docs: content/data-preparation/external-development.md

- **CI/CD pipelines** --- run offline checks on every change and deploy automatically from GitHub Actions.

### Getting started {#getting-started}

Fork or clone the [template repository](https://github.com/Cumulocity-IoT/data-preparation-rules-template) and follow its README. The typical workflow is:

1. **Create** a rule from the provided scaffolding command.
2. **Validate** it offline (type-check, lint, schema validation).
3. **Test** it against your tenant using the platform's testing endpoint.
4. **Deploy** it to your tenant.

Refer to the template repository's README for the full developer guide, including prerequisites, credentials, and CI/CD setup.

### TypeScript API reference {#typescript-api-reference}

Smart function input and output types are published as the [`@c8y/dataprep-types`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@c8y/dataprep-types) npm package. The generated TypeScript API reference (TypeDoc) is available at [Data Preparation Smart Function API](https://cumulocity-iot.github.io/data-preparation-rules-template/).

### REST API {#rest-api}

> The Data Preparation control plane REST API --- used by the template's test and deploy tooling --- is documented at the [OpenAPI specifications website](https://cumulocity.com/api/data-preparation). To access interactive API documentation within your tenant, subscribe to and install the **Api-doc** extension from **Administration** > **Ecosystem** > **Extensions** and open the **API documentation** app > **Data Preparation** tab.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Data Preparation control plane REST API --- used by the template's test and deploy tooling --- is documented it the [{{< openapi >}}](https://cumulocity.com/api/data-preparation). To access interactive API documentation within your tenant, subscribe to and install the **Api-doc** extension from **Administration** > **Ecosystem** > **Extensions** and open the **API documentation** application > **Data Preparation** tab.
```

You can also retrieve the raw OpenAPI JSON specification directly:

```shell
curl -u '<username>' 'https://<your-tenant>/service/dataprep/v3/api-docs'
```

### Rule package format {#rule-package-format}

Rules are deployed as a gzip-compressed TAR archive (`tar.gz`). This section describes the archive structure required by the deploy endpoint. The `npm run deploy` script in the [template repository](https://github.com/Cumulocity-IoT/data-preparation-rules-template) builds archives in this format automatically.

#### Archive structure {#archive-structure}

Files must be at the **root level** of the archive:

| Path | Required | Description |
|------|----------|-------------|

> | `data-prep.yaml` | Yes | Rule configuration (see below) |

Reviewer: Files names are formatted in italics throughout the docs

Author: [f04dc30](https://github.com/Cumulocity-IoT/c8y-docs/pull/4807/commits/f04dc30e2f14c912ba297b0b1007ba54bbac4411)

> | `<smartFunctionFile>` | Yes | Bundled JavaScript file; the filename must match the `smartFunctionFile` field in `data-prep.yaml` |

Reviewer: JavaScript - according to @matj-sag must be spelled as Javascript

Author: [f04dc30](https://github.com/Cumulocity-IoT/c8y-docs/pull/4807/commits/f04dc30e2f14c912ba297b0b1007ba54bbac4411)

| `tests/*.yaml` | No | Test cases; each file becomes a named test stored on the deployed rule |

Any other files in the archive are silently ignored.

Archives are subject to the following limits:

- Maximum **100 entries** per archive.
- Maximum **1 MB** per file (`dataprep` / `rule-import.max-file-size`).
- Maximum **10 MB** total extracted size (`dataprep` / `rule-import.max-total-size`).
- Entries containing path traversal segments (`..`) are rejected.

#### `data-prep.yaml` schema {#data-prep-yaml-schema}

| Field | Type | Required | Description |
|-------|------|----------|-------------|

> | `smartFunctionFile` | string | Yes | Filename of the bundled JavaScript file at the archive root |

Reviewer: JavaScript > Javascript

Author: [f04dc30](https://github.com/Cumulocity-IoT/c8y-docs/pull/4807/commits/f04dc30e2f14c912ba297b0b1007ba54bbac4411)

| `input` | object | Yes | Transport and topic configuration (see below) |
| `description` | string | No | Human-readable rule description |
| `tags` | string[] | No | Tag list |
| `disabled` | boolean | No | Whether the rule deploys as disabled; defaults to `false` |

The `input` object:

| Field | Type | Required | Description |
|-------|------|----------|-------------|

> | `transport` | string | Yes | Transport type; currently only `"mqtt"` is supported |

Reviewer: Inconsistent pucntuaction in the last column

Author: [f04dc30](https://github.com/Cumulocity-IoT/c8y-docs/pull/4807/commits/f04dc30e2f14c912ba297b0b1007ba54bbac4411)

| `topicPattern` | string | Yes | Topic filter; use `*` as a wildcard to match zero or more characters. Note that transport-specific wildcards such as `+` and `#` are not supported here. |
| `clientIDPattern` | string | No | Device client ID filter; use `*` as a wildcard to match zero or more characters. |
| `transportID` | string | No | Transport connection identifier. If not specified, falls back to the `transport` value |

Example `data-prep.yaml`:

```yaml
smartFunctionFile: transform.js
description: "Converts temperature sensor readings to Cumulocity measurements"
tags:
  - sensor
  - temperature
input:
  transport: mqtt
  topicPattern: "sensors/temperature/*"
  clientIDPattern: "*"
```

#### Test file format {#test-file-format}

Each `.yaml` file under `tests/` defines a named test case. The filename without extension is the test name. Test files are optional — if included in the archive they are stored server-side on the deployed rule.

| Field | Type | Required | Description |
|-------|------|----------|-------------|
| `inputs` | array | Yes | One or more device messages to send as input (see below) |

> | `expectedOutput` | array | No | Expected [Cumulocity object](/data-preparation/smart-functions/#cumulocity-objects) outputs; used for comparing against actual outputs when running tests |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `expectedOutput` | array | No | Expected [{{< product-c8y-iot >}} object](/data-preparation/smart-functions/#cumulocity-objects) outputs; used for comparing against actual outputs when running tests|
```

Each item in `inputs` has the following fields:

| Field | Type | Required | Description |
|-------|------|----------|-------------|
| `payload` | string | Yes | Message payload |
| `topic` | string | Yes | Topic string |
| `clientID` | string | Yes | Device client ID |
| `time` | string | Yes | ISO 8601 timestamp, for example `2026-01-01T12:00:00.000Z` |
| `payloadFormat` | string | Yes | Format of the `payload` field; one of `text`, `json`, or `base64` |

Example `tests/temperature-reading.yaml`:

```yaml
inputs:
  - payload: '{"temperature": 25.5}'
    payloadFormat: json
    topic: "devices/sensor01/data"
    clientID: "sensor01"
    time: "2026-01-01T12:00:00.000Z"

expectedOutput:
  - cumulocityType: measurement
    externalSource:
      - externalId: sensor01
        type: c8y_Serial
    payload:
      type: c8y_Weather
      time: "2026-01-01T12:00:00.000Z"
      c8y_Temperature:
        T:
          value: 25.5
          unit: "°C"
```

#### Deploy endpoint {#deploy-endpoint}

```
PUT /service/dataprep/v1/rules/{name}/deployed
Content-Type: application/gzip
```

> The rule name comes from the URL path, not from the archive. If a rule with the given name already exists it is overwritten. The endpoint requires the `DATA_PREPARATION_DEPLOYMENTS_ADMIN` role.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The rule name comes from the URL path, not from the archive. If a rule with the given name already exists it is overwritten. The endpoint requires the `DATA_PREPARATION_DEPLOYMENTS_ADMIN` permission.
```

---

Besides authoring rules in the Data Preparation application, you can develop, version, test, and deploy rules from your own development environment using the open-source [Data Preparation rules template](https://github.com/Cumulocity-IoT/datapreparation-rules-template) repository.

### What it is {#what-it-is}

The template repository is a ready-to-use project for developing Data Preparation rules in an IDE such as Visual Studio Code instead of the in-app editor. Each rule lives in its own folder with a TypeScript smart function, a `data-prep.yaml` configuration, and test cases. The repository ships with the tooling to type-check, lint, validate, test, and deploy rules.

### Why use it {#why-use-it}

Developing rules externally gives you:

- **Version control** --- keep rules in Git alongside the rest of your IoT solution, with full history and review workflows.
- **IDE tooling** --- TypeScript IntelliSense, inline schema validation for the YAML files, linting that flags unsupported runtime features, and AI coding assistance.
- **CI/CD pipelines** --- run offline checks on every change and deploy automatically from GitHub Actions.

### Getting started {#getting-started}

> Fork or clone the [template repository](https://github.com/Cumulocity-IoT/datapreparation-rules-template) and follow its README. The typical workflow is:

Reviewer 2: "clone" here is a specific github term, and not a generic term, therefore we must use it and can't replace it with duplicate

1. **Create** a rule from the provided scaffolding command.
2. **Validate** it offline (type-check, lint, schema validation).
3. **Test** it against your tenant using the platform's testing endpoint.

> 4. **Deploy** it to your tenant.

Reviewer 2: I think this is probably OK, assuming the content of the repo README is more detailed. Is the repo available to review?

Author: Yes https://github.com/Cumulocity-IoT/datapreparation-rules-template/pull/1

Reviewer 2: but no github pages doc yet?

Author: https://vigilant-dollop-v3qoeol.pages.github.io/

Reviewer 2: Ah, OK, because it's still on a branch. I assume there's no problem with merging that PR?

Author: The main PR should just need review, I think the intention is for the docs to stay on the gh-pages branch

Reviewer 2: OK, then I'll ask a different question. What's up with the URL, and that doesn't match the one in this PR

Author: Ah its because Ben asked to rename datapreparation-rules-template to data-preparation-rules-template, Ill update the links. I think the URL is random just because the page is private at the moment, and making it public is disabled by the organisation. I'll check its fixed once the repo is public. The links should redirect to the right place though

Refer to the template repository's README for the full developer guide, including prerequisites, credentials, and CI/CD setup.

### TypeScript API reference {#typescript-api-reference}

Smart function input and output types are published as the [`@c8y/dataprep-types`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@c8y/dataprep-types) npm package. The generated TypeScript API reference (TypeDoc) is available at [Data Preparation Smart Function API](https://cumulocity-iot.github.io/datapreparation-rules-template/).

### REST API {#rest-api}

> The Data Preparation control plane REST API --- used by the template's test and deploy tooling --- is documented in the public [{{< product-c8y-iot >}} API documentation](https://{{< domain-c8y >}}/api/). An interactive Swagger UI is also available within your tenant at `https://<your-tenant>/service/dataprep/swagger-ui.html`.

Reviewer 2: @mcal-c8y are we removing the swagger reference? Or implementing it?

> The Data Preparation control plane REST API --- used by the template's test and deploy tooling --- is documented in the public [{{< product-c8y-iot >}} API documentation](https://{{< domain-c8y >}}/api/). An interactive Swagger UI is also available within your tenant at `https://<your-tenant>/service/dataprep/swagger-ui.html`.

Author: I'll need to discuss further with Jack but at the moment it doesn't look like it
